The plus ends of microtubules oscillate between phases of
growth and shortening in a process called dynamic instability. Kinetic
parameters used to describe microtubules' dynamic instability are the
rates and duration of the two phases as well as the frequency of their
interconversion (rescue and catastrophe). The parameters are extracted
from live cell time-lapse imaging of fluorescently labeled tubulin. To
date this is achieved with manual processing and hence is tedious and
subjective. The goal of this work has been to automate the parameter
extraction. Moreover, the accuracy of the estimate of the microtubule
length is increased by computing it using multiple points along the
microtubule axis. The automatic processing has been accomplished by
first computing the image domain in which a microtubule is oscillating
from a time-lapse fluorescent image stack. A Riemannian metric is
computed over that region with a variation of fast marching. A
geodesic in this metric gives the microtubule plus end
trajectory. Subsequently, the variation of the length of each
microtubule is used to subdivide the plus end polymerization into
piecewise segments of linear polymerization rates. The discrete
subdivision is performed efficiently using dynamic programming that
determines the line segments of the microtubule length that give the
best least squares fit in the time intervals. The line segments
provide the kinetic statistics. The effectiveness of the algorithm is
demonstrated with both phantom as well as real image sequences.
 
